Joystick Check v1.05
====================

Contents
--------
 1: Overview
 2: Quick start
 3: General information about joysticks
 4: Calibration for programs without build in calibration
 5: Calibration for programs with build in calibration
 6: Joystick problems
 7: Advanced joystick and flightstick
 8: Use of two joysticks
 9: Autofire
10: How to read the screen
11: Contact information


1: Overview
-----------
This program can be used to test and calibrate joysticks.
Both joysticks are read simultaneously, this makes it possible to
check advanced joysticks, flightsticks and dual joystick
configurations.

When using joysticks there are two kind of calibrations, joystick
hardware calibration and software calibration. This program is
designed to assist in hardware calibration, this is typically done
with some levers on the joystick.


2: Quick start
--------------
This program can be used to test one or two joysticks.

The program can be used to test different calibrations and see how the
joystick responds.

Test without calibration:

  Press F4 and select one of the types 1 to 7, this gives a standard
  calibration (Same as without calibration). Adjust trimmers on joystick
  until marker is centered when joystick is centered. Move joystick
  around, if the joystick can cover all of the green area and can't be
  moved into the red area, the calibration is ok for program without
  calibation routins.

Test with one point calibration:

  Press F4 and select one of the types 1 to 7, this gives a standard
  calibration (Same as without calibration). Press I and J for joystick
  1 or K and L for joystick 2.  Move joystick around, if the joystick
  can cover all of the green area and can't be moved into the red area,
  the calibration is ok.

Test with two point calibration:

  This can be done two ways:

  A:  Move joystick to upper left and press 1 for joystick 1 (3 for
      joystick 2), then move joystick to lower right and press 2 for
      joystick 1 (4 for joystick 2).
      Center joystick, marker must now be centered.
  B:  Move joystick to left and press A, then move joystick to top and
      press B, the move joystick to right and press C, and last move
      joystick to bottom and press D (This is for joystick 1, use EFGH
      for joystick 2).
      Center joystick, marker must now be centered.

Test with three point calibration:

  Do a two point calibration (either way can be used) and then center
  joystick and press IJ (for joystick 1, use KL for joystick 2).

Problems:

  When using one joystick there are 3 different problems that can affect
  the operation of the joystick.

  1:    Joystick is off center when doing a two point calibration and/or
        joystick is very sensitive in one direction when doing a tree
        point calibration.
        This problem can usual be solved with the trimmers on the
        joystick. Press SPACE and adjust the trimmers until the marker
        is centered.

  2:    Joystick moves out into the red area when doing a one point
        calibration.
        This is either due to a speed adjustable game card or a joystick
        with non-standard readings. When used with program that does two
        or tree point calibrations, this is acceptable. But when using
        with programs without calibration the only solution is a speed
        adjustable game card and adjust it until the readings are
        acceptable.

  3:    All other problems: unstable operation, or no joystick at all.
        This is usual a hardware problem, this includes broken cables,
        defect joysticks, two gamecards in the computer (One on the
        soundcard, one one the multiio-card or motherboard)

   With two joystick the most common problem is using two advanced
   joystick. The easy way to see if a advanced joystick is to test
   one at a time as joystick 1, if any button or marker shows up on
   joystick 2 in the testprogram this joystick can NOT be used together
   with other joysticks, it is TWO joysticks in one.


3: General information about joysticks
--------------------------------------
A PC can be equipped with one or two joystick, each with two buttons
and possible a autofire options. These joysticks are usual equipped
with a calibrations lever.

Joystick with more than two buttons or other functions uses both
joystick channels on the computer. For this reason they can not be
used together with other joysticks.

This program uses the orginal IBM specifications for joysticks, these
says that a joystick changes from 0Kohm to 100Kohm with 50Kohm at
center, giving a readout of 24uSec to 1124uSec with 574 uSec at
center. But the tolerances are huge making calibrations mandatory.


4: Calibration for programs without build in calibration
--------------------------------------------------------
Some programs is not equipped with joystick calibrations routines,
they expect a standard calibrated joystick. To get this standard
calibrations:

  Select standard calibration by pressing SPACE

  Move the calibration levers until the marker centered.

  Check if the marker can be moved to all parts of the green area and
  partial into the brown area. If the marker can be moves out into
  the red area or does not cover the green area then this joystick is
  unfit for use with programs without calibration routines.


This calibrations will NOT work for programs that can't compensate
for fast computers in the joystick readings.


5: Calibration for programs with build in calibration
-----------------------------------------------------
To get the best responce from the joystick it must be calibrated
before use:

  Move joystick to upper left and press 1

  Move joystick to lower rigth and press 2

  Center joystick, now the marker must be within the gray area, if
  not then adjust with the calibration levers.

  Repeat the process until the marker centers after software
  calibration with 1 & 2.

  It is now possible to move the marker inside the green area and
  some of the brown area, but the marker can not be moves into the
  red area. This is the optimal calibrations.


6: Joystick problems
--------------------
  Two joysticks ports, one on the multi I/O card and one on the
  soundcard. One of the ports must be disabled. Check the manuals,
  or sometime the text on the card, on how to disable the joystick
  input on one of the cards.

  The joystick ports is disabled. In a computer with two joysticks
  ports only one of them is supposed to work, the other must be
  disabled.

  Joystick is centered, but the games still moves, even after a
  calibration. This is because the hardware calibration of the
  joystick is wrong. Do a new hardware calibration (3)

  When using two joysticks one or both does strange things. This is
  usual because one or both joysticks are advanced joysticks. When
  using two joysticks only simple joysticks can be used (or a special
  cable that disabled the advanced facilities must be used).

  The fire buttons fires multiple times.
  This can be because: The joystick has autofire enabled
                       A bad firebutton (worn out)
                       The program can be very sensitive


7: Advanced joystick and flightstick
------------------------------------
The joysticks is equipped with more than two fire buttons and
possible som other functions. These joysticks uses both joystick
inputs in the connector. This prevent the use of two joysticks
because an advance joysticks IS two joysticks in one!

Usual a advanced joysticks uses the following functions:
  Stick              -> Joystick #1 Stick
  Fire #1            -> Joystick #1 Fire #1
  Fire #2            -> Joystick #1 Fire #2
  Fire #3            -> Joystick #2 Fire #1
  Fire #4            -> Joystick #2 Fire #2
  Other functions    -> Joystick #2 Stick

Devices like accelerator, steering wheel, throttle and rudders  will
usual use one of the stick directions. But one some advanced
joysticks the can also map to keys.


8: Use of two joysticks
-----------------------
Most joysticks ports on a PC is designed to accept two joysticks.
Only a Y-cable is required for connection of two joysticks.

When using two joystick, both has to be simple joysticks (Only two
fire buttons and no other functions). When using advanced joysticks
they will usual affect each other.

Do NOT mount two joystick ports on the computer, this will not work.
If the joystick port only support one joystick then it must be
replaced.


9: Autofire
-----------
Many joysticks are equipped with autofire, this function makes the
joysticks press the fire button multiple times when it is held down
(This does not make the joystick an advanced joystick).

Autofire can give problems when using the joystick to select options,
each press on the fire button is perceived as multiple presses.

To check autofire, hold down the button. The button circle will flash
and a number will show how fast the autofire is, keep the button down
for some seconds to get a stable reading.

Only enable autofire if it is required in the game. Most games have a
build in autofire ability.


10: How to read the screen
--------------------------
The two squares are the two joysticks, when a stick is connected a
yellow circle with a cross will be shown this is the marker.

The green circles are the fire buttons, when a fire buttons is
pressed the circle will change to red.

The numbers are actual values and the actuel calibration.

The letters and numbers in the red part of the joystick area are used
for calibration, move the joystick fully in the direction of the
letter/number and press it.


11: Contact information
-----------------------
There is NO registration for this program. If your have any comments
about the program, mail them to me.

Henrik K. Jensen
hkj@login.dknet.dk
